INDIAN BRONZE SCULPTURE
105
contour. The result is a continuous flowing line on this
side of the figure. At the level of the ankles of the Buddha
figure the drapery makes a conspicuous curvilinear turn,
as it is held by the left hand.
The additional importance of the Gupta and Vakataka
bronzes is that they were portable and monks carried them
from place to place for the purpose of individual worship
or to be installed in Buddhist viharas. In this manner the
refined classical style spread to different parts of India
and to Asian countries overseas. The hoard of bronzes
discovered in Akota near Vadodara established that bronze
casting was practised in Gujarat or western India between
the sixth and ninth centuries. Most of the images represent
the Jaina tirthankaras like Mahavira, Parshvanath or
Adinath. A new format was invented in which tirthankaras
are seated on a throne; they can be single or combined in
a group of three or in a group of twenty-four tirthankaras.
Female images were also cast representing yakshinis or
The Lost-wax Process
The lost-wax process is a technique used for making objects of
metal, especially in Himachal Pradesh, Odisha, Bihar, Madhya
Pradesh and West Bengal. In each region, a slightly different
technique is used.
The lost-wax process involves several different steps. First a
wax model of the image is made by hand of pure beeswax that
has first been melted over an open fire, and then strained through
a fine cloth into a basin of cold water. Here it resolidifies
immediately. It is then pressed through a pichki or pharni —
which squeezes the wax into noodle-like shape. These wax wires
are then wound around to the shape of the entire image.
The image is now covered with a thick coating of paste, made
of equal parts of clay, sand and cow-dung. Into an opening on
one side, a clay pot is fixed. In this molten metal is poured. The
weight of the metal to be used is ten times that of wax. (The wax
is weighed before starting the entire process.) This metal is
largely scrap metal from broken pots and pans. While the
molten metal is poured in the clay pot, the clay-plastered
model is exposed to firing. As the wax inside melts, the metal
flows down the channel and takes on the shape of the wax
image. The firing process is carried out almost like a religious
ritual and all the steps take place in dead silence. The image
is later chiselled with files to smoothen it and give it a finish.
Casting a bronze image is a painstaking task and demands
a high degree of skill. Sometimes an alloy of five metals —
gold, silver, copper, brass and lead — is used to cast bronze
images.
Devi, Chola bronze,
