AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
30
in the contours gets reduced and images are given
movement. Narration gets elaborated. Carving techniques
appear more advanced than Bharhut. Symbols continue
to be used representing the Buddha and the Manushi
Buddhas or the past Buddhas (according to the textual
tradition, there are twenty-four Buddhas but only the first
one, Dipankar, and the last six are pictorially represented).
At Sanchi Stupa-1, narratives get more elaborated;
however, the depiction of the dream episode remains very
simple showing the reclining image of the queen and the
elephant at the top. The historical narratives such as the
siege of Kushinara, Buddha’s visit to Kapilavastu, visit of
Ashoka to the Ramgrama Stupa are carved with
considerable details. In Mathura, images of this period
bear the same quality but are different in the depiction of
physiognomic details.
Mathura, Sarnath and Gandhara Schools
The first century CE onwards, Gandhara (now in Pakistan),
Mathura in northern India and Vengi in Andhra Pradesh
emerged as important centres of art production. Buddha
in the symbolic form got a human form in Mathura and
Gandhara. The sculptural tradition in Gandhara had the
confluence of Bactria, Parthia and the local Gandhara
tradition. The local sculptural tradition at Mathura became
so strong that the tradition spread to other parts of northern
India. The best example in this regard is the stupa sculptures
found at Sanghol in the Punjab. The Buddha image at
Mathura is modelled on the lines of earlier Yaksha images
whereas in Gandhara it has Hellenistic features.
Images of Vaishnava (mainly Vishnu and his various
forms) and Shaiva (mainly the lingas and mukhalingas)
faiths are also found at Mathura but Buddhist images are
found in large numbers. It may be noted that the images
of Vishnu and Shiva are represented by their ayudhas
(weapons). There is boldness in carving the large images,
the volume of the images is projected out of the picture
plane, the faces are round and smiling, heaviness in the
sculptural volume is reduced to relaxed flesh. The garments
of the body are clearly visible and they cover the left
shoulder. Images of the Buddha, Yakshas, Yakshinis,
Shaivite and Vaishnavite deities and portrait statues are
profusely sculpted. In the second century CE, images in
Mathura get sensual, rotundity increases, they become
fleshier. In the third century CE, treatment of sculptural
volume changes by reducing the extreme fleshiness,
movement in the posture is shown by increasing distance
Part of railing, Sangol
Stone carving, Stupa-1,
