This painting on the back wall of the interior
hall before the shrine-antechamber in Cave No. 1
at Ajanta dates back to the late fifth century
CE. The Boddhisattva is holding a padma (lotus),
has large shoulders, and has three bents in the
body creating a movement in the picture space.
The modelling is soft. Outlines are merged with
the body volume creating the effect of three-
dimensionality. The figure of the Boddhisattva
is wearing a big crown in which detailed
rendering is visible. The head is slightly bent to
the left. The eyes are half-closed and are slightly
elongated. The nose is sharp and straight. Light
colour all over the projected planes of the face
is aimed at creating an effect of three-
dimensionality. The beaded necklace too has
similar features. Broad and expanded
shoulders create heaviness in the body. The
torso is relatively round. Lines are delicate,
rhythmic, and define the contours of the body. The right hand is
holding a lotus and the left hand is extended in the space. The
Boddhisattva is surrounded by small figures. The foreshortened right
hand of the Boddhisattva makes the image more solid, and effectively
dense. The thread over the torso is shown with fine spiral lines
indicating its dimensions. Each and every part of the body is given
equal attention. Light red, brown, green and blue colours are used.
Nose projections, incised end of lips with lower lip projection and
small chin contribute to the overall effect of solidity in the figure
composition. The paintings in Cave No.1 are of good quality and are
better preserved. One can observe certain typological and stylistic
variations in the paintings of Ajanta indicating different guilds of
artisans working on the cave paintings at Ajanta over the centuries.
 On the other side of the image Vajrapani Bodhisattva has been
painted. He holds a vajra in his right hand and wears a crown. This
image also bears the same pictorial qualities as the Padmapani.
Cave No. 1 has many interesting paintings
of Buddhist themes such as Mahajanak
Jataka, Umag Jataka, etc. The Mahajanak
Jataka is painted on the entire wall side and
is the biggest narrative painting. It may be
observed that the paintings of Padmapani
and Vajrapani and the Bodhisattvas are
painted as shrine guardians. Similar such
iconographic arrangement is also observed
in other caves of Ajanta. However
Padmapani and Vajrapani in Cave No. 1 are
among the best survived paintings of Ajanta.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
55
Ajanta Cave No. 2
Painting of Mahajanak Jataka,
