The Buddha head from Taxila in the Gandhara region, now in
Pakistan, dates back to the second century CE and belongs
to the Kushana Period. The image shows hybridised pictorial
conventions that developed during the Gandhara period.
It has Greco-Roman elements in the treatment of
sculpture. The Buddha head has typical Hellenistic
elements that have grown over a period of time. The
curly hair of the Buddha is thick having a covered
layer of sharp and linear strokes over the head.
The forehead plane is large having protruding
eyeballs, the eyes are half-closed and the face
and cheeks are not round like the images found
in other parts of India. There is a certain amount
of heaviness in the figures of the Gandhara
region. The ears are elongated especially the
earlobes. The treatment of the form bears linearity
and the outlines are sharp. The surface is
smooth. The image is very expressive. The
interplay of light and dark is given
considerable attention by using the curving
and protruding planes of the eye-socket and
the planes of the nose. The expression of
calmness is the centre point of attraction.
Modelling of the face enhances the naturalism
of three-dimensionality. Assimilating various
traits of Acamenian, Parthian and Bactrian
traditions into the local tradition is a hallmark
of the Gandhara style. The Gandhara images
have physiognomic features of the Greco-Roman tradition
but they display a very distinct way of treating physiognomic
details that are not completely Greco-Roman. The source of
development of Buddha images as well as others has its
genesis in its peculiar geo-political conditions. It may also
be observed that the north-western part of India, which is
now Pakistan, always had continuous habitation from proto-
historic times. It continued in the historical period as well.
A large number of images have been found in the Gandhara
region. They consist of narratives of the life of the Buddha,
narrations from the Jataka stories, and Buddha and
Boddhisattva images.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
