Mahabalipuram is an important coastal town from the period of the
Pallavas. It is dotted with several important rock-cut and free-standing
structural temples mostly made in the seventh and eighth centuries.
This large sculptural panel, one of the largest and oldest known in the
world, is nearly thirty metres long and fifteen metres high. There is a
natural cleft in the rock which has been cleverly used by its sculptors as
a channel for water to flow down. This water collects in a massive tank in
front of the sculpted wall.
Scholars have interpreted the story depicted on the panel differently.
While some believe that it is the story of the descent of the Ganga from
heaven to earth, others believe that the main story is of Kiratarjuniya or
Arjuna’s penance, a poetic work by Bharvi which is known to have been
popular in the Pallava court. Other scholars have interpreted the
symbolism behind the sculptures to show that the whole tableau was
created to be a prashasti, or something to praise the Pallava king, who,
they say, would have sat enthroned in the tank in front of this
extraordinary backdrop.
A temple has been given prominence in the relief. Ascetics and
worshippers sit before it. Above it is an emaciated bearded figure standing
in penance on one leg, his arms raised above his head. He has been
identified by some as Bhagirath and by others as Arjuna. Arjuna’s penance
was to obtain the pashupata weapon from Shiva, whereas Bhagirath
prayed to have Ganga brought to earth. Next to this figure stands Shiva
who has one hand in the boon bestowing gesture or varada mudra. The
small gana or dwarf who stands below this hand may be a personification
of the powerful pashupata weapon.
All the figures are shown with a slender and linear quality in an
animated state of movement. Apart from humans and flying celestials
there are several naturalistically carved birds and animals as well.
Particularly noteworthy are the extraordinarily well-modelled, and life-
like elephants, and the pair of deer who are under the shrine. The most
humorous, however, is a cat who has been shown standing on his hind
legs, with his hands raised, imitating Bhagirath or Arjuna. Close
examination, however, reveals that this cat is, in fact, a symbolic device.
He is surrounded by rats, which are unable to disturb him from his
penance. Perhaps this is a metaphor used by the artist to show how
strong Arjuna's or Bhagirath’s penance was, who is also standing still,
undisturbed by his surroundings.
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
