121
SOME ASPECTS OF INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
A straight path through the bagh
reaches the plinth of the tomb from where
is accessed the floor terrace of the edifice.
At the corners of the terrace stand four tall,
tapering minarets, one hundred and thirty-
two feet high. The main body of the building
is topped with a drum and dome and four
cupolas forming a beautiful skyline. The
plinth, the walls of the structure and the
drum-dome are in perfect proportion to one
another. Towards the west of the white
marble-faced tomb lies a red sandstone
mosque and a similar construction in the
east to maintain balance. Marble for the
building was quarried from the Makrana
mines in Rajasthan and this white edifice
is contrasted with the red sandstone of the
surrounding structures.
The tomb structure is a square with
chamfers forming eight sides, recessed with
deep arches. This structural stylisation
produces in the elevation of the building a
variety of contrasting planes and shade and
solids and voids effects. All sides of the
building, the twin elevations of floor to roof
and roof to pinnacle, atop the foliated crest
of the dome, measure 186 feet each.
The interior arrangements of the
mausoleum consist of a crypt below and a
vaulted, octagonal tomb chamber above, with
a room at each angle, all connected with
corridors. Light to every part of the building
is obtained by means of carved and
perforated jalis, set in the arched recesses
of the interior. The ceiling is as high as the
façade creating a void with the help of a
double dome.
Four types of embellishments have been
used with great effect for the interior and
exterior surfaces of the Taj Mahal. These
are stone carvings in high and low relief
on the walls, the delicate carving of marble
into jalis and graceful volutes (spiral
ornament on the pillar), and the creation
of arabesques with pietra dura (yellow
marble, jade and jasper) on walls and
tombstones and geometric designs with
tessellation. Lastly, the art of calligraphy
is used with the inlay of jasper in white
marble to write Quranic verses. Calligraphy
provided a decorative element on the walls
and a continuous connection with
the Almighty.
