AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
26
was collective in nature and at times only a specific portion
of the monument is said to have been patronised by a
particular patron. Traders recorded their donation along
with their place of origin.
In the subsequent century, stupas were elaborately built
with certain additions like the enclosing of the
circumambulatory path with railings and sculptural
decoration. There were numerous stupas constructed earlier
but expansions or new additions were made in the second
century BCE. The stupa consists of a cylindrical drum
and a circular anda with a harmika and chhatra on the
top which remain consistent throughout with minor
variations and changes in shape and size. Apart from the
circumambulatory path, gateways were added. Thus, with
the elaborations in stupa architecture, there was ample
space for the architects and sculptors to plan elaborations
and to carve out images.
During the early phase of Buddhism, Buddha is depicted
symbolically through footprints, stupas, lotus throne,
chakra, etc. This indicates either  simple worship, or paying
respect, or at times depicts historisisation of life events.
Gradually narrative became a part of the Buddhist
tradition. Thus events from the life of the Buddha, the
Jataka stories, were depicted on the railings and torans of
the stupas. Mainly synoptic narrative, continuous narrative
and episodic narrative are used in the pictorial tradition.
While events from the life of the Buddha became an
important theme in all the Buddhist monuments, the Jataka
stories also became equally important for sculptural
decorations. The main events associated with the Buddha’s
life which were frequently depicted were events related to
the birth, renunciation, enlightenment, dhammachakra-
pravartana, and mahaparinibbana (death).  Among the
Jataka stories that are frequently depicted are Chhadanta
Jataka, Vidurpundita Jataka, Ruru Jataka, Sibi Jataka,
Vessantara Jataka and Shama Jataka.
Stupa worship, Bharhut
EXERCISE
1. Do you think that the art of making sculptures in India
began during the Mauryan period?
2. What was the significance of the stupa and how did stupa
architecture develop?
3. Which were the four events in the life of the Buddha which
have been depicted in different forms of Buddhist art? What
did these events symbolise?
4. What are the Jatakas? How do the Jatakas relate to
Buddhism? Find out.
