AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
108
EXERCISE
1. Do you think that the technique of bronze casting has
been a continuous process? How did it evolve over a period
of time?
2. In India sculpturing in stone and metal happened
simultaneously. In your opinion what were the similarities
and differences between both technically, stylistically and
functionally?
3. Why are Chola bronze sculptures considered as the most
refined?
4. Search for visuals of bronze sculptures of the Buddha
belonging to periods other than the Chola Period from
Himachal Pradesh, Kashmir, etc.
The well-known dancing figure of Shiva as Nataraja
was evolved and fully developed during the Chola Period
and since then many variations of this complex bronze
image have been modelled.
A wide range of Shiva iconography was evolved in the
Thanjavur (Tanjore) region of Tamil Nadu. The ninth century
kalyanasundara murti is highly remarkable for the manner
in which Panigrahana (ceremony of marriage) is represented
by two separate statuettes. Shiva with his extended right
hand accepts Parvati’s (the bride’s) right hand, who is
depicted with a bashful expression and taking a step
forward. The union of Shiva and Parvati is very ingeniously
represented in the ardhanarisvara murti in a single image.
Beautiful independent figurines of Parvati have also been
modelled, standing in graceful tribhanga posture.
During the sixteenth century, known as the Vijayanagar
Period in Andhra Pradesh, the sculptors experimented with
portrait sculpture in order to preserve knowledge of the
royal patron for posterity. At Tirupati, life-size standing
portrait statues were cast in bronze, depicting
Krishnadevaraya with his two queens, Tirumalamba and
Chinnadevi. The sculptor has combined the likeness of
the facial features with certain elements of idealisation.
The idealisation is further observed in the manner the
physical body is modelled to appear imposing as well as
graceful. The standing king and queens are depicted in
praying posture, that is, both hands held in the namaskara
mudra.
