TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
73
established that this temple was built in the early sixth
century CE. That is, about a hundred years or so after the
small temples we just learnt about in Sanchi and Udaigiri.
This makes it a classic example of a late Gupta Period
type of temple. This temple is in the panchayatana style of
architecture where the main shrine is built on a rectangular
plinth with four smaller subsidiary shrines at the four
corners (making it a total number of five shrines, hence
the name, panchayatana). The tall and curvilinear shikhara
also corroborates this date. The presence of this curving latina
or rekha-prasada type of shikhara also makes it clear that
this is an early example of a classic nagara style of temple.
Sheshashayana is the form of Vishnu where he is
shown reclining on the sheshanaga called Ananta.
Nara-Narayan shows the discussion between the
human soul and the eternal divine. Gajendramoksha
is the story of achieving moksha, symbolically
communicated by Vishnu’s suppression of an asura
who had taken the form of an elephant.
This west-facing temple has a grand doorway with
standing sculptures of female figures representing the
Ganga on the left side and the Yamuna on the right side.
The temple depicts Vishnu in various forms, due to which
it was assumed that the four subsidiary shrines must also
have housed Vishnu’s avatars and the temple was mistaken
for a dasavatara temple. In fact, it is
not actually known to whom the four
subsidiary shrines were originally
dedicated. There are three main
reliefs of Vishnu on the temple walls:
Sheshashayana on the south, Nara-
Narayan 
on 
the 
east 
and
Gajendramoksha on the west. The
temple is west-facing, which is less
common, as most temples are east- or
north-facing.
Numerous temples of smaller
dimensions have been constructed
over a period of time. By contrast, if
we study the temples of Khajuraho
made in the tenth century, i.e., about
four hundred years after the temple
at Deogarh, we can see how
dramatically the shape and style of
the nagara temple architecture had
developed.
Vishwanatha temple,
