PREFACE
During the nineteenth century (the period of British rule),
a few British colonial officers took active interest to study
India’s past in collaboration with some Indian scholars  and
it is out of such endeavours that a systematic study of
architectural monuments, sculptures and paintings began
in the Indian sub-continent. The first attempt in this regard
document the monuments as they represent a very visible
evidence of the bygone era. Over a period of time with the
archaeological explorations and excavations, many art-
historical sites were discovered. Decipherment of
inscriptions, and coins played a very significant role in
our understanding of the past art traditions. With the study
of religious texts, history of religion was studied and
identification of icons/sculptures and paintings was
initiated, which became a dominant area of early
scholarship. Study of art history has developed in
association with the archaeological studies, however, it is
now recognised as a specialised discipline. In the West,
mainly in Europe, the art-historical discipline has grown
considerably with numerous methodological inputs,
whereas in India it is still in the process of developing its
investigating mechanisms.
As the study of art history has grown out of extensive
documentations and excavations, one finds description of
art objects as a prominent method of study. There are a
few significant studies of the early twentieth century, where
the concerns are addressed beyond mere description.
Subsequently, several generations of outstanding Western
and Indian scholars of Indian art history have studied the
subject at great depth making us realise the glorious past
of the Indian civilisation through its creations reflected in
the architectural monuments, sculptures and paintings.
We can claim a distinct Indian approach to the arts of the
building edifices, the sculpture making and the language
of painting in comparison with the European art on one
hand and the far Eastern art on the other. Therefore, the
Indian art historical studies have emerged as a prestigious
academic discipline at a university level education.
