This image of the Buddha from Sarnath belonging to the late fifth
century CE is housed in the site museum at Sarnath. It has been
made in Chunar sandstone. The Buddha is shown seated on a
throne in the padmasana. It represents dhammachackrapravartana
as can be seen from the figures on the throne. The panel below the
throne depicts a chakra (wheel) in the centre and a deer on either
side with his disciples. Thus, it is the representation of the historical
event of dhammachakrapravartana or the preaching of the dhamma.
This Buddha image is a fine example of  the Sarnath school of
sculpture. The body is slender and well-proportioned but slightly
elongated. The outlines are delicate, very rhythmic. Folded legs are
expanded in order to create a visual balance in the picture space.
Drapery clings to the body and is transparent to create the effect of
integrated volume. The face is round, the eyes are half-closed, the
lower lip is protruding, and the
roundness of the cheeks has
reduced as compared to the earlier
images from the Kushana Period
at Mathura. The hands are shown
in dhammachakrapravartana
mudra placed just below the chest.
the neck is slightly elongated with
two incised lines indicating folds.
The ushanisha has circular curled
hairs. The aim of the sculptors in ancient India had always been to
represent the Buddha as a great human being who achieved nibbana
(i.e., cessation of anger and hate). The back of the throne is profusely
decorated with different motifs of flowers and creepers placed in a
concentric circle. The central part of the halo is plain without any
decoration. It makes the halo visually impressive. Decoration in halo
and the back of the throne indicates the artisan’s sensitivity.
Sarnath Buddha images of this period show considerable softness
in the treatment of the surface and volume. Transparent drapery
becomes part of the physical body. Such refinement comes over a
period of time and these features continued in subsequent periods.
There are many other Buddha images in the standing position
from Sarnath having features like transparent drapery, subtle
movement, carved separately and
placed about the memorial stupas
around the Dharmarajika Stupa. These
images are now preserved in the
Sarnath Museum. They are either
single or with the attendant figures of
Boddhisattvas, Padmapani and
Vajrapani.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
