PREHISTORIC ROCK PAINTINGS
Pottery and metal tools are also shown. But
the vividness and vitality of the earlier
periods disappear from these paintings.
The artists of Bhimbetka used many
colours, including various shades of white,
yellow, orange, red ochre, purple, brown,
green and black. But white and red were
their favourite colours. The paints were
made by grinding various rocks and
minerals. They got red from haematite
(known as geru in India). The green came
from a green variety of a stone called
chalcedony. White might have been made out of limestone.
The rock of mineral was first ground into a powder. This
may then have been mixed with water and also with some
thick or sticky substance such as animal fat or gum or
resin from trees. Brushes were made of plant fibre. What
is amazing is that these colours have survived thousands
of years of adverse weather conditions. It is believed that
the colours have remained intact because of the chemical
reaction of the oxide present on the surface of the rocks.
The artists here made their paintings on the walls and
ceilings of the rock shelters. Some of the paintings are
reported from the shelters where people lived. But some
others were made in places which do not seem to have been
living spaces at all. Perhaps these places had some religious
importance. Some of the most beautiful paintings are very
high up on rock shelters or close to the ceilings of rock-
shelters. One may wonder why early human beings chose
to paint on a rock in such an uncomfortable position. The
paintings made at these places were perhaps for people to
be able to notice them from a distance.
The paintings, though from the remote past, do not lack
pictorial quality. Despite various limitations such as acute
working conditions, inadequate tools, materials, etc., there
is a charm of simple rendering of scenes of the
environment in which the artists lived. The men shown in
them appear adventurous and rejoicing in their lives. The
animals are shown more youthful and majestic than
perhaps they actually were. The primitive artists seem to
possess an intrinsic passion for storytelling. These pictures
depict, in a dramatic way, both men and animals engaged
in the struggle for survival. In one of the scenes, a group
of people have been shown hunting a bison. In the process,
some injured men are depicted lying scattered on the
ground. In another scene, an animal is shown in the agony
of death and the men are depicted dancing. These kinds
5
Why has the animal been
shown so big and man
so small?
Painting showing a man
being hunted by a beast,
