FOREWORD
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) has constantly been working for the past fifty
years to bring in an impact on the country’s school
educational system. In the recent years, specially with the
National Curriculum Framework (NCF) - 2005, there has been
a significant shift in the development of textbooks, their
presentation and inter-disciplinary approach, the typology
of exercises, etc. All these efforts have made the textbooks
child friendly. At the senior secondary stage, which is also
the school leaving stage, students should have more options
to move further in different fields of higher education or
professional education. With this view, the NCERT for the
first time took the initiatives of developing the curriculum
and syllabi in different art related areas for this stage.
At this stage of education, the emphasis has been given
to a professional approach towards the subject of Fine Arts
making it a discipline rather than on creating awareness
and knowledge, which was generic in nature till secondary
classes. The teaching objectives also shift towards
sharpening of skills in fine arts and develop a perspective
of design and instead of free expression and doing arts
emphasis is on students’ expressing themselves in their
own style and medium. Also, there has been a need to
develop a historical perspective of art in context of the
world as well as India. Art History is a part of studies of
arts and in itself it is a major area of education from which
students learn about their cultural heritage.
It was observed that many of the education boards offer
Fine Arts as an optional subject at the senior secondary
stage which includes painting, sculpture, applied arts or
commercial arts. These were reviewed and a new syllabus
was formed. Since this course apart from the practical
component include theory which introduces students to
the art historical heritage of country’s diverse art and
architecture, the textbook ‘An Introduction to Indian Art’
has been developed for Classes XI and XII.
The textbook for Class XI extensively covers the tradition
of cave paintings in the pre-historic era and their
