INDIAN BRONZE SCULPTURE
107
armed Avalokitesvara, which is a good example of a male
figure in graceful tribhanga posture. Worship of female
goddesses was adopted which is part of the growth of the
Vajrayana phase in Buddhism. Images of Tara became very
popular. Seated on a throne, she is accompanied by a growing
curvilinear lotus stalk and her right hand is in the abhaya
mudra.
The bronze casting technique and making of bronze
images of traditional icons reached a high stage of
development in South India during the medieval period.
Although bronze images were modelled and cast during
the Pallava Period in the eighth and ninth centuries, some
of the most beautiful and exquisite statues were produced
during the Chola Period in Tamil Nadu from the tenth to
the twelfth century. The technique and art of fashioning
bronze images is still skillfully practised in South India,
particularly in Kumbakonam. The distinguished patron
during the tenth century was the widowed Chola queen,
Sembiyan Maha Devi. Chola bronzes are the most sought-
after collectors’ items by art lovers all over the world.
Among the Pallava Period bronzes of the eighth century
is the icon of Shiva seated in ardhaparyanka asana (one
leg kept dangling). The right hand is in the achamana
mudra gesture, suggesting that he is about to drink poison.
Shiva is associated with the end of the cosmic
world with which this dancing position is
associated.
In this Chola period bronze sculpture he
has been shown balancing himself on his right
leg and suppressing the apasmara, the demon
of ignorance or forgetfulness, with the foot of
the same leg. At the same time he raises his
left leg in bhujangatrasita stance, which
represents tirobhava, that is kicking away the
veil of maya or illusion from the devotee’s mind.
His four arms are outstretched and the main
right hand is posed in abhaya hasta or the
gesture suggesting. The upper right holds the
damaru his favourite musical instrument to
keep on the beat tala. The upper left hand
carries a flame while the main left hand is held
in dola hasta and connects with the abhaya
hasta of the right hand. His hair locks fly on
both the sides touching the circular jvala mala
or the garland of flames which surrounds the
entire dancing figuration.
Nataraja
Nataraja, Chola period, twelfth
