SOME ASPECTS OF INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
111
ARCHITECTURAL INFLUENCES
Amongst provincial styles, the architecture of Bengal and Jaunpur
is regarded as distinct. Gujarat was said to have a markedly
regional character for patrons borrowed elements from regional
temple traditions such as toranas, lintels in mihrabs, carvings of
bell and chain motifs, and carved panels depicting trees, for tombs,
mosques and dargahs. The fifteenth century white marble dargah
of Shaikh Ahmad Khattu of Sarkhej is a good example of provincial
style and it heavily influenced the form and decoration of Mughal
tombs.
DECORATIVE FORMS
These forms included designing on plaster through incision or
stucco. The designs were either left plain or covered with colours.
Motifs were also painted on or carved in stone. These motifs
included varieties of flowers, both from the sub-continent and
places outside, particularly Iran. The lotus bud fringe was used
to great advantage in the inner curves of the arches. Walls were
also decorated with cypress, chinar and other trees as also with
flower vases. Many complex designs of flower motifs decorating
the ceilings were also to be found on textiles and carpets. In the
fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth centuries tiles were also used
to surface the walls and the domes. Popular colours were blue,
turquoise, green and yellow. Subsequently the techniques of
tessellation (mosaic designs) and pietra dura were made use of
for surface decoration particularly in the dado panels of the walls.
At times lapis lazuli was used in the interior walls or on canopies.
Other decorations included arabesque, calligraphy and high and
low relief carving and a profuse use of jalis. The high relief carving
has a three- dimensional look. The arches were plain and squat
and sometimes high and pointed. From the sixteenth century
onwards arches were designed with trefoil or multiple foliations.
Spandrels of the arches were decorated with medallions or bosses.
The roof was a mix of the central dome and other smaller domes,
chatris and tiny minarets. The central dome was topped with an
inverted lotus flower motif and a metal or stone pinnacle.
Pietra dura work, Agra
Dodo panel on the wall,
