Mathura was a great centre for making sculptures
during the early historic period and many images have
been found here. A large number of images dating
back to the Kushana Period is from Mathura. A
distinct way of sculpting practised at Mathura makes
the images found here different from those at other
centres in the country. The image of the Buddha from
the Katra mound belongs to the second century CE.
It represents the Buddha with two Boddhisattva
attendants. The Buddha is seated in padmasana
(cross-folded legs) and the right hand is in the
abhayamudra, raised a little above the shoulder level
whereas the left hand is placed on the left thigh. The
ushanisha, i.e., hair knot, is shown with a vertically
raised projection. Mathura sculptures from this period
are made with light volume having fleshy body. The
shoulders are broad. The sanghati (garment) covers
only one shoulder and has been made prominently
visible covering the left hand whereas while covering
the torso, the independent volume of the garment is
reduced to the body torso. The Buddha is seated on a
lion throne. The attendant figures are identified as
the images of the Padmapani and Vajrapani
Boddhisattvas as one holds a lotus and the other a
vajra (thunderbolt). They wear crowns and are on
either side of the Buddha. The halo around the head of the Buddha
is very large and is decorated with simple geometric motifs. There
are two flying figures placed diagonally above the halo. They bear a
lot of movement in the picture space. Flexibility replaces the earlier
rigidity in the images giving them a more earthy look. Curves of the
body are as delicately carved. The upright posture of the Buddha
image creates movement in space. The face is round with fleshy
cheeks. The bulge of the belly is sculpted with controlled
musculature. It may be noted that there are numerous examples of
sculptures from the Kushana Period at Mathura, but this image is
representative and is important for the understanding of the
development of the Buddha image in the subsequent periods.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
