I
N the seventh and eighth centuries CE, Islam spread towards
Spain and India. Islam came to India, particularly, with Muslim
merchants, traders, holy men and conquerors over a passage of
six hundred years. Although by the eighth century CE, Muslims
had begun to construct in Sind, Gujarat, etc., it was only in the
early thirteenth century that large-scale building activity was
begun by the Turkish State, established after the Turkish
conquest of northern India.
By the twelfth century India was already familiar with
monumental constructions in grandiose settings. Certain
techniques and embellishments were prevalent and popular, such
as trabeation, brackets, and multiple pillars to support a flat
roof or a small shallow dome. While arches were shaped in wood
and stone, these were unable to bear the weight of the top
structure. Now, however, the archuate form of construction was
introduced gradually in which arches could support the weight
of the domes. Such arches needed to be constructed with voussoirs
(series of interlocking blocks) and fitted with keystones. The domes,
resting on pendentives and squinches enabled spanning of large
spaces leaving the interiors free of pillars.
A noteworthy aspect of these migrations and conquests was
that Muslims absorbed many features of local cultures and
traditions and combined them with their own architectural
practices. Thus, in the field of architecture, a mix of many
structural techniques, stylised shapes, and surface decorations
came about through constant interventions of acceptance,
rejection or modification of architectural elements. These
architectural entities or categories showcasing multiple styles
are known as Indo-Saracenic or Indo-Islamic architecture.
According to E. B. Havell, Hindus conceived manifestations of
god everywhere in multiple forms as part of their religious faith
whereas a Muslim thought of only one with Muhammad as His
Prophet. Hence, Hindus adorned all surfaces with sculptures and
paintings. Muslims forbidden to replicate living forms on any
surface, developed their religious art and architecture consisting
of the arts of arabesque, geometrical patterns and calligraphy on
plaster and stone.
SOME ASPECTS OF
INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
8
