POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
37
has a hundred and eight excavated caves. The most
important sites are Ajanta, Pitalkhora, Ellora, Nashik,
Bhaja, Junnar, Karla, Kanheri. Ajanta, Ellora, and Kanheri
continue to flourish. Earlier it was presumed that because
of the absence of the Buddha image, the caves were
considered belonging to the orthodox faith of Buddhism,
i.e., the Thervadins, but with the discovery of the Konkan
Maurya inscription mentioning the Saka era 322, i.e., 400
CE, it is now satisfactorily proved that the cave activity in
western Deccan was an ongoing process and many caves
had been carved with Buddha images where the image
does not exist any more. It may also be noted that many
caves are converted into modern Hindu shrines and have
become popular worshipping sites.
Ajanta
The most famous cave site is Ajanta. It is located in
Aurangabad District of Maharashtra State. Ajanta has
twenty-nine caves. It has four chaitya caves datable to the
earlier phase, i.e., the second and the first century BCE
(Cave  Nos. 10 and 9) and the later phase, i.e., the fifth
century CE (Cave Nos. 19 and 26). It has large chaitya-
viharas and is decorated with sculptures and paintings.
Ajanta is the only surviving example of painting of the
first century BCE and the fifth century CE. The caves at
Ajanta as well as in western Deccan in general have no
precise chronology because of the lack of known dated
inscriptions.
Cave Nos. 10, 9, 12 and 13 belong to the early phase,
Caves Nos. 11, 15 and 6 upper and lower, and Cave No. 7
belong to the phase earlier than late fifth century CE. The
rest of the caves belong to late fifth century CE to early
sixth century CE. The chaitya Cave Nos. 19 and 26 are
elaborately carved. Their
facade is decorated with
Buddha and, Boddhisattva
images. They are of the
apsidal-vault-roof variety.
Cave No. 26 is very big and
the entire interior hall is
carved with a variety of
Buddha images, the biggest
one being the Mahaparinibbana
image. The rest of the caves
are vihara-chaitya caves. They
consist of a pillared veranda,
a pillared hall and cells along
