The theme of Mara Vijaya has been painted
in the caves of  Ajanta. This is the only
sculptural representation sculpted on the
right wall of Cave No. 26. It is sculpted near
the 
colossal 
Buddha 
image 
of
Mahaparinibbana. The panel shows the
image of the Buddha in the centre
surrounded by Mara’s army along with his
daughter. The event is part of the
enlightenment. It is a personification of the
commotion of mind which the Buddha
went 
through 
at 
the 
time 
of
enlightenment. Mara represents  desire.
According to the narrative, there is a
dialogue between the Buddha and Mara,
and the Buddha is shown with his right hand indicating towards
earth as a witness to his generosity. This relief sculptural panel is
highly animated and shows a very matured sculptural style at
Ajanta. The composition is very complex with  highly voluminous
images. Their complex arrangement in the picture space is highly
dynamic and generates considerable movement. The figure on the
right shows Mara coming with his army consisting of various kinds
of people including some with grotesque animal faces. The dancing
figures at the lower base with the musicians have forward bulging
waist, and one of the dancing figures has expanded her hands in
the dancing posture with an angular frontal look. On the left lower
end, the image of Mara is shown contemplating how to disturb
Siddhartha, the name of the Buddha before enlightenment. The
army of Mara is shown marching towards the Buddha in the first
half of the panel whereas the lower half of the panel shows the
departing army of Mara giving him adorations. The centrally placed
Buddha is in padmasana and a tree at the back is shown by dense
leaves. Some of the facial features of the Mara army has tacit
characters of the sculptures from
Vidarbha. The artisans at Ajanta worked
in guilds and their stylistic affiliations can
be traced by identifying such stylistic
features. This is the largest sculptural
panel at Ajanta. Though there are several
big images in the caves of Ajanta and
especially located in the shrine-
antechamber as well as facade walls, such
a complex arrangement of figures is
unique. On the other hand, painted panels
exhibit such complexities in their
arrangement. A similar kind of
arrangement of dancing figures in a panel
is also observed at the Aurangabad caves.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
