EXERCISE
1. According to your observation how did the people of
prehistoric times select themes for their paintings?
2. What could have been the reasons for depicting more animal
figures than human figures in cave paintings?
3. Many visuals of prehistoric cave paintings have been given
in this chapter. Among these which one do you like the
most and why? Give a critical appreciation of the visual.
4. Other than Bhimbetka, which are the other major sites
where these prehistoric paintings have been found? Prepare
a report on different aspects of these paintings with pictures
or line drawings.
5. In modern times, how have walls been used as a surface to
make paintings, graphics, etc?
7
PREHISTORIC ROCK PAINTINGS
of paintings might have given man a sense of power over
the animals he would meet in the open.
This practice is common among primitive people of
today also. They engrave or paint on rocks as part of
the rituals they perform at birth, at death, at coming
of age and at the time of marriage. They dance,
masked, during hunting rites to help them kill
animals difficult to find or kill.
The paintings of individual animals show the mastery
of skill of the primitive artist in drawing these forms. Both,
proportion and tonal effect, have been realistically
maintained in them.
It is interesting to note that at many rock-art sites
often a new painting is painted on top of an older painting.
At Bhimbetka, in some places, there are as many as 20
layers of paintings, one on top of another. Why did the
artists paint in the same place again and again? Maybe,
this was because the artist did not like his creation and
painted another painting on the previous one, or some of
the paintings and places were considered sacred or special
or this was because the area may have been used by
different generations of people at different times.
These prehistoric paintings help us to understand about
early human beings, their lifestyle, their food habits, their
daily activities and, above all, they help us understand
their mind—the way they thought. Prehistoric period
remains are a great witness to the evolution of human
civilisation, through the numerous rock weapons, tools,
ceramics and bones. More than anything else, the rock
paintings are the greatest wealth the primitive human
beings of this period left behind.
