AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
102
EXERCISE
1. Mark out all the places discussed in this chapter on a map
of India.
2. What are the commonalities and differences between North
Indian and South Indian temples? Make a diagram to
supplement your answer.
3. Bring out the stylistic differences of any two sculptural
traditions (such as Pala, Chola, Pallava, Chandella, etc.)
using either drawing, painting or clay-modelling.
Supplement your project with a written assignment that
explains the salient features of the two styles you have
chosen.
4. Compare any two temple styles in India; supplement with
a line drawing.
5. Trace the development in Buddhist art.
Project Work
Find any temple or monastery in or around your town and
note down its important features such as different
artchitectural features, sculptural style, identification of
images, dynastic affiliation and patronage.
large number of bronze scupltures have been found in the
country which shall be discussed in the next chapter.
We have focussed on the dominant art styles and some
of the most famous monuments from different parts of India
in the medieval period. It is important to realise that the
enormous artistic achievements that we have studied here
would never have been possible if artists worked alone.
These large projects would have brought architects,
builders, sculptors and painters together.
Above all, by studying these artworks, we are able to
learn much about the kind of society that made these
objects. Through them we can surmise what their buildings
were like, what types of clothes they wore and above all
we can use the art material to reconstruct the history of
their religions. These religions, as we have seen were many
and diverse and constantly changing. Hinduism, Buddhism
and Jainism each have a plethora of gods and goddesses,
and this was the period when bhakti and tantra — two
major developments, affected them. Temples also became
a space for many other art forms: such as music and dance
and, from the tenth century onward, temples became large
landowners and performed an administrative role as well.
