I
NDIAN sculptors had mastered the bronze medium and
the casting process as much as they had mastered
terracotta sculpture and carving in stone. The cire-perdu
or ‘lost-wax’ process for casting was learnt as long ago as
the Indus Valley Culture. Along with it was discovered the
process of making alloy of metals by mixing copper, zinc
and tin which is called bronze.
Bronze sculptures and statuettes of Buddhist, Hindu
and Jain icons have been discovered from many regions of
India dating from the second century until the sixteenth
century. Most of these were required for ritual worship
and are characterised by exquisite beauty and aesthetic
appeal. At the same time the metal-casting process
continued to be utilised for making articles for various
purposes of daily use, such as utensils for cooking, eating,
drinking, etc. Present-day tribal communities also utilise
the ‘lost-wax’ process for their art expressions.
Perhaps the ‘Dancing Girl’ in tribhanga posture from
Mohenjodaro is the earliest bronze sculpture datable to
2500 BCE. The limbs and torso of this female figurine are
simplified in tubular form. A similar group of bronze
statuettes have been discovered on archaeological
excavation at Daimabad (Maharashtra) datable to 1500
BCE. Significant is the ‘Chariot’, the wheels of which are
represented in simple circular shapes while the driver or
human rider has been elongated, and the bulls in the
forefront are modelled in sturdy forms.
Interesting images of Jain Tirthankaras have been
discovered from Chausa, Bihar, belonging to the Kushana
Period during second century CE. These bronzes show how
the Indian sculptors had mastered the modelling of
masculine human physique and simplified muscles.
Remarkable is the depiction of Adinath or Vrishabhnath,
who is identified with long hairlocks dropping to his
shoulders. Otherwise the tirthankaras are noted by their
short curly hair.
Many standing Buddha images with right hand in
abhaya mudra were cast in North India, particularly Uttar
INDIAN BRONZE
SCULPTURE7
Kaliyadaman, Chola bronze,
