123
SOME ASPECTS OF INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
Gumbad is situated in Bijapur in the Bijapur District of Karnataka. It  is  the
mausoleum of Muhammad Adil Shah (1626–1656) the seventh Sultan of the Adil
Shahi Dynasty of Bijapur (1489–1686). Built by the ruler himself it is a striking
edifice in spite of being unfinished. The tomb is a complex of buildings such as a
gateway, a Naqqar Khana, a mosque and a sarai located within a large-walled
garden.
The Gumbad is a monumental square building topped with a circular drum
over which rests a majestic dome, giving the building its nomenclature. It is built
of dark gray basalt and decorated plasterwork. Each wall of the tomb is one hundred
and thirty-five feet long and one hundred and ten  feet high and ten feet thick.
With the drum and the dome the building rises to a height of over two hundred
feet. The tomb has onl,y one square chamber and the dome, with a diameter of
one hundred and twenty-five feet, covers an uninterrupted floor space of 18,337
square feet, the largest in the world.
The tomb chamber contains the burial place of the Sultan, his wives and
other relatives, while their real graves lie perpendicularly below in a vault, accessed
by stairs. The hemispherical masonry dome over a square base was constructed with the help of pendentives. These pendentives
not only lent shape to the dome but also transferred its weight to the walls below. New vaulting systems consisting of arch-nets or
stellate forms in squinches were created to cover angles formed by intersecting arches.
The building has an amazing acoustical system. Along the drum of the
dome there is a whispering gallery where sounds get magnified and echoed
many times over.
At the four corners of the building are seven-storeyed octagonal spires
or minaret-like towers. These towers house staircases leading to the top
dome. The drum of the dome is decorated with foliation. A heavily bracketed
cornice resting on corbels is a distinctive feature of the facade.
Gol Gumbad is a fine convergence of many styles located in medieval
India. Monumentality, majesty and grandeur, integral aspects of the
architectural experience in India, are associated with buildings of Bijapur.
While its structural particularities of dome, arches, geometric proportions
and load bearing techniques suggest Timurid and Persian styles, it is made
of local material and is decorated with surface embellishments popular in
the Deccan. Four towers at the corners are reminiscent of turrets attached
to mosques such as Qila-i Kuhna Masjid and the Purana Qila in Delhi.
Drum of the Dome
