While political and religious history contributed towards
reconstructing historical developments, sculptural and
architectural history has been reconstructed within the
time-frame of political history. The styles of many
monuments and sculptures have been attributed to the
dynastic affiliations like the Mauryan art, Satavahana art,
Gupta art, etc. Alternatively the periodisations of art follows
religious denominations such as the Buddhist, Hindu and
Islamic 
periods. 
However, 
such 
deterministic
nomenclatures are only partially useful for understanding
the art traditions.
Often the study of art objects is based on two important
approaches, (i) formalistic or stylistic analysis and
(ii) content and contextual studies. The first category
involves study of formalistic characteristics of architecture/
sculpture/paintings, whereas the second category
concentrates at various levels of content analysis which
has several components such as iconographic study,
iconology, narrative and semiotics.
Iconography involves identification of images through
certain symbols/signs and relevant myths or narrative
episodes, whereas iconology involves study of evolution of
such signs and symbols in its historical, social and
philosophical context. Today, the methodological framework
tries to explore various concerns and issues in the process
of art productions and attempts to go beyond  the traditional
meanings. It may be observed that the political intentions
of various religious ideologies are yet to become  the part
of the larger investigative process. Religious ideologies also
were instrumental in shaping the social and economic
formulations in ancient India. Therefore, it becomes
important to study such factors that have influenced art
forms. Large body of material has come from the religious
sites but it does not mean that there was no art in non-
religious domains. Terracotta figurines are the best examples
in this category, however, due to space constraint they have
been only mentioned but not extensively discussed. In the
present text, the authors have tried to move away from the
normative traditional descriptive writings to broader
development of art and architectural monuments in terms
of their stylistic developments as well as their social and
political affiliations.
Cultural manifestations have diverse ideologies in the
form of architecture, sculpture and paintings. They need
to be studied with their religious and social view points,
hence, unilinear projection of the cultural tradition needs
to be reconsidered as it is away from realities of the ancient
past. Different categories of artisans existed in the actual
