PREHISTORIC ROCK PAINTINGS
paintings belong to late historical, early
historical and Neolithic periods. The subjects
depicted are bulls, elephants, sambhars,
gazelles, sheep, goats, horses, stylised
humans, tridents, but rarely, vegetal motifs.
But the richest paintings are reported from
the Vindhya ranges of Madhya Pradesh and
their Kaimurean extensions into Uttar
Pradesh. These hill ranges are full of
Palaeolithic and Mesolithic remains, and they
are also full of forests, wild plants, fruits,
streams and creeks, thus a perfect place for
Stone Age people to live. Among these the
largest and most spectacular rock-shelter is
located in the Vindhya hills at Bhimbetka in
Madhya Pradesh. Bhimbetka is located forty-
five kilometres south of Bhopal, in an area of
ten square kilometres, having about eight
hundred rock shelters, five hundred of which
bear paintings.
The caves of Bhimbetka were discovered
in 1957–58 by eminent archaeologist V.S.
Wakankar and later on many more were
discovered. Wakankar spent several years in
surveying these inaccessible hills and jungles
to study these paintings.
The themes of paintings found here are of great variety,
ranging from mundane events of daily life in those times to
sacred and royal images. These include hunting, dancing,
music, horse and elephant riders, animal fighting, honey
collection, decoration of bodies, and other household scenes.
The rock art of Bhimbetka has been classified into
various groups on the bases of style, technique and
superimposition. The drawings and paintings can be
catagorised into seven historical periods. Period I, Upper
Palaeolithic; Period II, Mesolithic; and Period III,
Chalcolithic. After Period III there are four
successive  periods. But we  will confine
ourselves here only to the first three phases.
Upper Palaeolithic Period
The paintings of the Upper Palaeolithic phase
are linear representations, in green and dark
red, of huge animal figures, such as bisons,
elephants, tigers, rhinos and boars besides
stick-like human figures. A few are wash
paintings but mostly they are filled with
Can you figure out what the
artist is trying to depict in
this painting?
Cave entrance, Bhimbetka,
Madhya Pradesh
