POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
45
EXERCISE
1. Describe the physical and aesthetic features of Sanchi
Stupa-I.
2. Analyse the stylistic trends of the sculptures in North India
during the fifth and sixth centuries.
3. How did cave architecture develop in different parts of
India, from cave shelters to the monolitic temple at Ellora?
4. Why are the mural paintings of Ajanta renowned?
chaitya arches on the exterior. They are rectangular with
vaulted roof and are carved single-storeyed or double-
storeyed without a large central hall. These excavations
date back to the second century BCE. There are some
excavations which were added in the subsequent centuries
but all are of the vihara type. Apart from Guntapalle, the
other important cave site is Rampaerrampallam which has
very moderate small excavations but there are rock-cut
stupas on the hillock. At Anakapalli near Vishakhapatnam,
caves were excavated and a huge rock-cut stupa was carved
out of the hillock during the fourth–fifth centuries CE. It
is a unique site as it has the biggest rock-cut stupas in
the country. Many votive rock-cut stupas all around the
hillock have also been excavated.
The rock-cut cave tradition also existed in Odisha. The
earliest examples are the Udaigiri-Khandagiri caves in the
vicinity of Bhubaneswar. These caves are scattered and
have inscriptions of Kharavela kings. According to the
inscriptions, the caves were meant for Jain monks. There
are numerous single-cell excavations. Some have been
carved in huge independent boulders and given the shape
of animals. The big caves include a cave with a pillared
veranda with cells at the back. The upper part of the cells
is decorated with a series of chaitya arches and narratives
that still continue in the folklores of the region. The figures
in this cave are voluminous, move freely in the picture
space, and are an excellent example of qualitative carving.
Some caves in this complex were excavated later, some
time in the eighth–ninth centuries CE.
