AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
70
Kalasha
Amalaka
Garbhagriha
Pitha
Shikhara
Nagara temple
mixing of the Nagara and Dravida orders is mentioned by
some scholars. Elaborate studies are available on the
various sub-styles within these orders. We will look into
the differences in the forms further on in this chapter. As
temples grew more complex, more surfaces were created
for sculpture through additive geometry, i.e., by adding
more and more rhythmically projecting, symmetrical walls
and niches, without breaking away from the fundamental
plan of the shrine.
SCULPTURE, ICONOGRAPHY AND ORNAMENTATION
The study of images of deities falls within a branch of art
history called ‘iconography’, which consists of identification
of images based on certain symbols and mythologies
associated with them. And very often, while the
fundamental myth and meaning of the deity may remain
the same for centuries, its specific usage at a spot can be
a response to its local or immediate social, political or
geographical context.
Every region and period produced its own distinct style
of images with its regional variations in iconography. The
temple is covered with elaborate sculpture and ornament
that form a fundamental part of its conception. The
placement of an image in a temple is carefully planned:
for instance, river goddesses (Ganga and Yamuna) are
usually found at the entrance of a garbhagriha in a Nagara
temple, dvarapalas (doorkeepers) are usually found on the
gateways or gopurams of Dravida temples, similarly,
mithunas (erotic images), navagrahas (the nine auspicious
planets) and yakshas are also placed at entrances to guard
them. Various forms or aspects of the main divinity are to
be found on the outer walls of the sanctum. The deities of
directions, i.e., the ashtadikpalas face the eight key
directions on the outer walls of the sanctum and/or on
the outer walls of a temple. Subsidiary shrines around the
main temple are dedicated to the family or incarnations of
the main deity. Finally, various elements of ornamentation
such as gavaksha, vyala/yali, kalpa-lata, amalaka, kalasha,
etc. are used in distinct ways and places in a temple.
THE NAGARA OR NORTH INDIAN TEMPLE STYLE
The style of temple architecture that became popular in
northern India is known as nagara. In North India it is
common for an entire temple to be built on a stone platform
with steps leading up to it. Further, unlike in South India
it does not usually have elaborate boundary walls or
