TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
91
Buddhist, Hindu and Jain monuments; however,
Badami, Khajuraho and Kannauj have the remains
of any two of the religions right next to each other.
When the Gupta empire crumbled in the sixth
century CE, this eastern region of Bihar and
Bengal, historically known as Magadha, appears
to have remained unified whilst numerous small
Rajput principalities sprang up to the west. In the
eighth century, the Palas came to power in the
region. The second Pala ruler, Dharmapala, became
immensely powerful and established an empire by
defeating the powerful Rajput Pratiharas.
Dharmapala consolidated an empire whose wealth
lay in a combination of agriculture along the fertile
Ganges plain and international trade.
The pre-eminent Buddhist site is, of course,
Bodhgaya. Bodhgaya is a pilgrimage site since
Siddhartha achieved enlightenment here and
became Gautama Buddha. While the bodhi tree is
of immense importance, the Mahabodhi Temple at
Bodhgaya is an important reminder of the brickwork of
that time. The first shrine here, located at the base of the
Bodhi tree, is said to have been constructed by King
Ashoka; the vedika around it is said to be post-Mauryan,
of about 100 BCE; many of the sculptures in the niches in
the temple are dated to the eighth century Pala Period,
while the actual Mahabodhi temple itself as it stands now
is largely a Colonial Period reconstruction of the old seventh
century design. The design of the temple is unusual. It is,
strictly speaking, neither dravida or nagara. It is narrow
like a nagara temple, but it rises without curving, like a
dravida one.
The monastic university of Nalanda is a mahavihara as
it is a complex of several monastries of various sizes. Till
date, only a small portion of this ancient learning centre
has been excavated as most of it lies buried under
contemporary civilisation, making further excavations
almost impossible.
Most of the information about Nalanda is based on the
records of Xuan Zang—previously spelt as ‘Hsuan-tsang’—
which states that the foundation of a monastery was laid
by Kumargupta I in the fifth century CE; and this was
carried forward by the later monarchs who built up a
fantastic university here. There is evidence that all three
Buddhist doctrines— Theravada, Mahayana and
Vajrayana—were taught here and monks made their way
to Nalanda and its neighbouring sites of Bodh Gaya and
Kurkihar from China, Tibet and Central Asia in the north,
Mahabodhi temple,
