The Lion Capital discovered more than a hundred years ago
at Sarnath, near Varanasi, is generally referred to as Sarnath
Lion Capital. This is one of the finest examples of sculpture
from the Mauryan period. Built in commemoration of the
historical event of the first sermon or the Dhammachakrapravartana
by the Buddha at Sarnath, the capital was built by Ashoka.
The capital originally consisted of five component parts:
(i) the shaft (which is broken in many parts now), (ii) a lotus
bell base, (iii) a drum on the bell base with four animals
proceeding clockwise, (iv) the figures of four majestic addorsed
lions, and (v) the crowning element, Dharamchakra, a large
wheel, was also a part of this pillar. However, this wheel is
lying in a broken condition and is displayed in the site museum
at Sarnath. The capital without the crowning wheel and the
lotus base has been adopted as the National Emblem of
Independent India.
Now kept in the archaeological museum at Sarnath, the
capital has four lions firmly seated back to back on a circular
abacus. The lion figures of the capital are very impressive and
massive. The monumentality of the image is easily noticeable.
The facial musculature of the lions is very strong. The inversed
lines of the lips and its subsequent effect of projection at the
end of the lips show the sculptor’s observation for naturalistic
depiction. The lions appear as if they have held their breath.
The lines of the mane are sharp and follow the conventions
that were in practice during that time. The surface of the
sculpture is heavily polished which is typical of the Mauryan
Period. Their curly manes have protruding volume. The weight
of the body of each lion is firmly shown by the stretched muscles
of the feet. The abacus has the depiction of a chakra (wheel)
having twenty-four spokes in all the four directions and a bull,
a horse, an elephant and a lion between every chakra is finely
carved. The motif of the chakra becomes significant as a
representation of the Dhammachkra in the entire Buddhist art.
Each animal figure, despite sticking to the surface, is
voluminous, its posture creating movement in the circular
abacus. Despite having limited space between each chakra,
these animal figures display considerable command over the
depiction of movement in a limited space. The circular abacus
is supported by an inverted lotus capital. Each petal of the
lotus is sculpted keeping in mind its density. The lower portion
has curved planes neatly carved. Being a pillar image, it was
conceived to be viewed from all the side, thus there are no
boundations of fixed view points. A lion capital has also been
found at Sanchi but is in a dilapidated condition. The motif of
lion-capital-pillar continued even in the subsequent period.
ARTS OF THE MAURYAN PERIOD
