Sanchi, about 50 km from Bhopal, the capital of Madhya Pradesh,
is a world heritage site. Along with other relatively small stupas,
there are three main stupas at Sanchi. Stupa-1 is presumed to have
the relics of the Buddha, Stupa-2, the relics of ten less famous arhats
belonging to three different generations. Their names are found on
the relic casket. Stupa-3 has the relics of Sariputta and
Mahamougalayana.
Stupa-1, known for the carvings on its gateways is one of the
finest examples of stupa architecture. Originally the stupa was a
small brick structure which expanded over a period and was covered
with stone, vedika and the torana (gateways). The Ashokan lion-
capital pillar with an inscription is found on the southern side of
the stupa, indicating how Sanchi became a centre of monastic and
artistic activities. The south gateway was made first followed by the
others. The pradakshinapath around the stupa is covered with the
vedika. There is also the upper pradakshinapath which is unique to
this site. The four gateways are decorated profusely with sculptures.
Buddha is shown symbolically as an empty throne, feet, chhatra,
stupas, etc. Toranas are constructed in all four directions. Their
stylistic differences indicate their possible chronology from the first
century BCE onwards. Though Stupa-1 is the oldest stupa, the
carving of images on the vedica of Stupa-2 are earlier than those on
Stupa-1. Jatakas also become an important part of the narratives
in stupas. The figures at Sanchi, despite being small in dimension,
show considerable mastery of sculpting. Their physiognomic
treatment of the body shows both depth and dimension which are
very naturalistic. There are guardian images on pillars and the
shalbhanjika (i.e., lady holding the branch of a tree) sculptures are
remarkable in their treatment of volume. The rigidity of the earlier
sculptures of Stupa-2 is no more there. Each torana consists of two
vertical pillars and three horizontal bars on the top. Each horizontal
bar is decorated with different sculptural themes on the front as
well as at the back. Supporting the extensions of the lowermost
horizontal bar from below are the images of shalbhanjikas.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
