AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
geometric patterns. The green paintings are of dancers
and the red ones of hunters.
Mesolithic Period
The largest number of paintings belong to  Period II that
covers the Mesolithic paintings. During this period the
themes multiply but the paintings are smaller in size.
Hunting scenes predominate. The hunting scenes depict
people hunting in groups, armed with barbed spears,
pointed sticks, arrows and bows. In some paintings these
primitive men are shown with traps and snares probably
to catch animals. The hunters are shown wearing simple
clothes and ornaments. Sometimes, men have been
adorned with elaborate head-dresses, and sometimes
painted with masks also. Elephant, bison, tiger, boar, deer,
antelope, leopard, panther, rhinoceros, fish, frog, lizard,
squirrel and at times birds are also depicted. The
Mesolithic artists loved to paint animals. In some pictures,
animals are chasing men. In others they are being chased
and hunted by men. Some of the animal paintings,
especially in the hunting scenes, show a fear of animals,
but many others show a feeling of tenderness and love
for them. There are also a few engravings representing
mainly animals.
Though animals were painted in a naturalistic style,
humans were depicted only in a stylistic manner. Women
are painted both in the nude and clothed. The young and
the old equally find place in these paintings. Children are
painted running, jumping and playing. Community dances
provide a common theme. There are paintings of people
gathering fruit or honey from trees, and of women grinding
and preparing food. Some of the pictures of men, women
and children seem to depict a sort of family life. In many
of the rock-shelters we find hand prints,
fist prints, and dots made by the
fingertips.
Chalcolithic Period
Period III covers the Chalcolithic period.
The paintings of this period reveal the
association, 
contact, 
and 
mutual
exchange of requirements of the cave
dwellers of this area with settled
agricultural communities of the Malwa
plains. Many a time Chalcolithic ceramics
and rock paintings bear common motifs,
e.g., cross-hatched squares, lattices.
4
One of the few images showing
