TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
81
middle of a tank. Although there are evidences of both
Hindu and Buddhist followings in Kashmir, this temple is
a Hindu one, possibly dedicated to Shiva. The architecture
of this temple is in keeping with the age-old Kashmiri
tradition of wooden buildings. Due to the snowy conditions
in Kashmir, the roof is peaked and slants slowly outward.
The temple is moderately ornamented, moving away from
the post-Gupta aesthetics of heavy carving. A row of
elephants at the base and a decorated doorway are the
only embellishments on the shrine.
Like the findings at Samlaji, the sculptures at Chamba
also show an amalgamation of local traditions with a post-
Gupta style. The images of Mahishasuramardini and
Narasimha at the Laksna-Devi Mandir are evidences of the
influence of the post-Gupta tradition. Both the images show
the influence of the metal sculpture tradition of Kashmir.
The yellow colour of the images is possibly due to an alloy
of zinc and copper which were popularly used to make
images in Kashmir. This temple bears an inscription that
states that it was built during the reign of Meruvarman
who lived in the seventh century.
Of the temples in Kumaon, the ones at Jageshwar near
Almora, and Champavat near Pithoragarh, are classic
examples of nagara architecture in the region.
THE DRAVIDA OR SOUTH INDIAN TEMPLE STYLE
Unlike the nagara temple, the dravida temple is enclosed
within a compound wall. The front wall has an entrance
gateway in its centre, which is known as a gopuram. The
shape of the main temple tower known as vimana in Tamil
Nadu is like a stepped pyramid that rises up geometrically
rather than the curving shikhara of North India. In the
South Indian temple, the word ‘shikhara’ is used only for
the crowning element at the top of the temple which is
usually shaped like a small stupika or an octagonal cupola—
this is equivalent to the amlak and kalasha of North Indian
temples. Whereas at the entrance to the North Indian
temple’s garbhagriha, it would be usual to find images such
as mithunas and the river goddesses, Ganga and Yamuna,
in the south you will generally find sculptures of fierce
dvarapalas or the door-keepers guarding the temple. It is
common to find a large water reservoir, or a temple tank,
Dravida temple
Shikhara
Vimana
Mandapa
Gopuram
