AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
74
The Lakshmana temple dedicated to Vishnu is the
grandest temple of Khajuraho, built in 954 by the Chandela
king, Dhanga. A nagara temple, it is placed on a high
platform accessed by stairs. There are four smaller temples
in the corners, and all the towers or shikharas rise high,
upward in a curved pyramidal fashion, emphasising the
temple’s vertical thrust ending in a horizontal fluted disc
called an amalak topped with a kalash or vase. The crowning
elements: amalak and kalash, are to be found on all nagara
temples of this period. The temple also has projecting
balconies and verandahs, thus very different from
Deogarh.
Khajuraho’s temples are also known for their extensive
erotic sculptures; the erotic expression is given equal
importance in human experience as spiritual pursuit, and
it is seen as part of a larger cosmic whole. Many Hindu
temples therefore feature mithun (embracing couple)
sculptures, considered auspicious. Usually, they are placed
at the entrance of the temple or on an exterior wall or
they may also be placed on the walls between the mandapa
and the main shrine. Khajuraho’s sculptures are highly
stylised with typical features: they are in almost full relief,
cut away from the surrounding stone, with sharp noses,
prominent chins, long slanting eyes and eyebrows. The
other notable example at Khajuraho is Kandariya Mahadeo
temple dedicated to Lord Shiva.
There are many temples at Khajuraho, most of them
devoted to Hindu gods. There are some Jain temples as
well as a Chausanth Yogini temple, which is of interest.
Predating the tenth  century, this is a temple of small,
square shrines of roughly-hewn granite blocks, each
dedicated to esoteric devis or goddesses associated with
the rise of Tantric worship after the seventh century. Several
such temples were dedicated to the cult of the yoginis across
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and even as far south as Tamil
Nadu. They were built between the seventh and tenth
centuries, but few have survived.
Dance class, Laxman Temple,
