S
IXTH century BCE marks the beginning of new
religious and social movements in the Gangetic valley
in the form of Buddhism and Jainism which were part of
the shraman tradition. Both religions became popular as
they opposed the varna and jati systems of the Hindu
religion. Magadha emerged as a powerful kingdom and
consolidated its control over the other regions. By the fourth
century BCE the Mauryas established their power and by
the third century BCE, a large part of India was under
Mauryan control. Ashoka emerged as the most powerful
king of the Mauryan dynasty who patronised the shraman
tradition in the third century BCE. Religious practices had
many dimensions and were not confined to just one
particular mode of worship. Worship of Yakshas and mother-
goddesses were prevalent during that time. So, multiple
forms of worship existed. Nevertheless, Buddhism became
the most popular social and religious movement. Yaksha
worship was very popular before and after the advent of
Buddhism and it was assimilated in Buddhism and Jainism.
Pillars, Sculptures and Rock-cut Architecture
Construction of stupas and viharas as part of monastic
establishments became part of the Buddhist tradition.
However, in this period, apart from stupas and viharas,
stone pillars, rock-cut caves and monumental figure
sculptures were carved at several places. The tradition of
constructing pillars is very old and it may be observed
that erection of pillars was prevalent in the Achamenian
empire as well. But the Mauryan pillars are different from
the Achamenian pillars. The Mauryan pillars are rock-cut
pillars thus displaying the carver’s skills, whereas the
Achamenian pillars are constructed in pieces by a mason.
Stone pillars were erected all over the Mauryan Empire
with inscriptions engraved on them. The top portion of the
pillar was carved with capital figures like the bull, the
lion, the elephant, etc. All the capital figures are vigorous
ARTS OF THE
MAURYAN PERIOD
Pillar capital and abacus
with stylised lotus
